Part I: (The week before Spring break)
In Part I, students will only explore existing approaches for the task they are tackling. The
requirement is for students to read a minimum of 8 papers and have a full understanding of the
task and existing models to solve the problem. It is recommended that students include 1–2
papers that provide an overview/survey on the problem to first fully understand the problem.
Also, at least four papers should be published in the past two years.
This phase is very important for the project as it gives the students an idea about what the
problem is, and also provides insight into the current existing approaches to tackle the problem.
Upon completing this part of the project, students will have a better understanding of the next
steps. For deliverables, students will write a minimum of three pages of their understanding of
the paper and the approaches. In this document, they should discuss the strengths and
weaknesses of each approach they read, providing a table. In addition to the report, students
will have class presentations to introduce approaches to their classmates.
It is essential to choose the right papers for this phase; Papers that are peer-reviewed, have
publicly available code (their results are reproducible), and have the right experimental settings.
During the course, students will learn how to find papers



As described in the course project description, in this phase, students will read the related
papers to their tasks. The requirements for the papers were a minimum of 8 papers, with 4 of
them being recent papers. The project has two deliverables, an in-class presentation and a
report.
For the presentation, each student will have 5 minutes to present their task and papers. The
presentation should have one slide with an example, explaining the task. The second slide
shows categorized related work based on what approaches were taken before. The third slide
should explain which approach is chosen by the student to run as the baseline model, and it
should be justified. Presentations for each student are limited to only 4 slides (one additional
slide if needed, otherwise just the 3 requested slides), and you should use space wisely. No
presentation should go over 5 minutes, and failure to do so will result in a penalty and your talk
will be stopped.
For the report, each student should have a minimum of three pages, reflecting their
understanding of existing work. You will provide a table, discussing the strengths and
weaknesses of each approach. In your report, you will refer to this table and explain each
approach. All the papers should be appropriately cited; if you are not familiar with Overleaf,
spend some time and learn how to correctly cite papers (this link might help).
For submission, all the slides for individual students should be put together and submitted as
one PDF file. You will present your talk from the submitted file. For the report, you should find
an appropriate follow, combine all the reports, and submit both .zip (source) and .pdf files from
Overleaf. The report should be in the Springer template shared before (Springer’s LNCS
template).
